1.1
a.  ability to act rationally based on knowledge
b.  intelligence originates not in biomass but in artifacts
c.  actor
d.  make near optimal decisions under certain criteria
e.  inference correct conclusions given a set of facts

1.2
https://www.csee.umbc.edu/courses/471/papers/turing.pdf
The Theological Objection:
    have no familiarity in christianity
    by my buddhist grandma, even the most insignificant kind of bugs have souls equal to human's
    so why not intelligent machines
The "Heads in the Sand" Objection
    this idea is even stronger today fueled by 70 years of sci-fi movies and literatures since then
    threat of a possible "AI domination" scenario is unlikely to stop the creation of AI (if ever possible)
    similar to nuclear weapons, AI technology is too much an advantage to any major power
The Mathematical Objection
    machines cannot solve the halting problem for certain, yet there's no proof whether human can do it better
    modern compilers can sometimes detect infinite loops which are unobvious to human eyes
The Argument from Consciousness
    seems to be the most relevant objection today and Turing's refutations on this topic was quite weak
    the idea was later expanded by the Chinese room argument
    recent breakthrough in ML and AI research made machines more rational, but not necessarily more humanly
Arguments from Various Disabilities
    either solved by now or not falsifiable at first place
Lady Lovelace's Objection
    if creativity on music composing or literature writing can be specified in terms of scores
    ML algorithms can train a machine to do it
    this objection lands more on ambiguity in human feelings / languages than ability of machines
Argument from Continuity in the Nervous System 
    no idea 
The Argument from Informality of Behaviour 
    AI today is already more error-prone than human while e.g. driving a car
The Argument from Extrasensory Perception
    can't believe they took ESP into consideration seriously
    was that common back in 1950s?
it turns out unskilled interrogator is too easy to fool:
    "Artificial Stupidity", The Economist, 324 (7770): 14, 1 August 1992
at this rate no one knows what will possibly happen in 50 years 

1.3
it's rational in the sense that it's based on practical reasons instead of emotions
it's not intelligent as it's not a decision by reasoning

1.4
IQ test is designed for normal human beings, not machines on a special task
the microworld of IQ test is overly restrictive

1.5
10^4 / 10^-3 = 10^7
human power: 10^14

1.6
1.  people lies for various reasons
2.  people who lacks certain knowledges cannot express their thought and emotion correctly
3.  people with satisfactory knowledge of thought and emotion is a biased sample

1.7
a.  pattern recognition for non-natural patterns (artifical barcodes)
b.  pattern recognition (NLP) & decision making (order of entries by preference / collected browse histories)
c.  pattern recognition for natural patterns (human voice)
d.  decision making

1.8
these computational models immitates result of human evolution instead of human knowledge
people don't have to understand the ATP cycle to lift and get fit

1.9
self-preservation as a population
by natural selection, entities without the urge of self-preservation are more likely to be eliminated by the environment
and in most case self-preservation is considered rational

1.10
both the theory and the realization of the theory should be considered AI
recent boom in ML is mostly boosted by powerful video cards 

1.11
the latter is true in the same way to 
"human thoughts are just a bunch of electrical and chemical signals being tossed around inside the brain"
thus the first sentence cannot be derived from the latter

1.12
the latter is not true, human thought and behavior is not that deterministic by gene

1.13
same to 1.11

1.14
Lists of entries not possible yet:
    h:  NLP or the ability of catching fuzzy ideas as "funny" is still lagging behind other aspects
    k:  not heard, but AI can help surgeons perform better
        by https://publishing.rcseng.ac.uk/doi/pdf/10.1308/rcsbull.2017.87, better computer vision is the missing piece

1.15
//  skipped

